(macos_users)=
# Setting up NeuroMiner on macOS

When you try to run NeuroMiner on macOS Monterey you might encounter a pop up window with an warning message similar to this:

> "svmtrain321.mexmaci64" cannot be opened because the developer cannot be verified.
>
> macOS cannot verify that this app is free from malware.
>
> 'Move to Bin' or 'Cancel'

This problem arises because macOS has additional security measures implemented and a warning will pop up for every MEX-file that is being called by NeuroMiner.
> A MEX file is a function, created in MATLAB, that calls a C/C++ program or a Fortran subroutine. A MEX function behaves just like a MATLAB script or function
>  see [MATLAB documentation](https://nl.mathworks.com/help/matlab/call-mex-file-functions.html)

To circumvent having to verifying each MEX-file manually, run the following in the terminal:
```
sudo xattr -r -d com.apple.quarantine PATH/TO/NEUROMINER
```
and then
```
sudo find PATH/TO/NEUROMINER -name \*.mexmaci64 -exec spctl --add {} \;
```
:::{note}
replace PATH/TO/NEUROMINER with the full path to the NeuroMiner installation. For example: 

/Users/claravetter/local/Code/NeuroMiner/NeuroMiner_1.2
:::

If you've saved the NeuroMiner folder somewhere on /Users/NAME/..., you will then be asked to enter your admin password (what you use to log into your account on your macOS computer).

For more information on what these commands do, see [this link](https://osxdaily.com/2015/07/15/add-remove-gatekeeper-app-command-line-mac-os-x/).


:::{annotation} Apple silicon chip
For MacOS users with an Apple silicon chip (M1 or M2) we recommend to use a Matlab version >= R2023b which can be downloaded [here](https://nl.mathworks.com/downloads/web_downloads/) (if you have a license). This will ensure that you can make use of all the functionalities of NeuroMiner. 

For further information on Matlab and Apple silicon chips, see [link](https://nl.mathworks.com/support/requirements/apple-silicon.html)
:::