# NeuroMiner 1.2 (09/2023)
```{figure} Images/splash.png
---
name: fig:nm_logo_1.2
alt: nm1.2
target: https://github.com/neurominer-git/NeuroMiner_1.2
---
```

## What is new
Check out the new features! 

- [Synthetic data modue](paramtemp_synthetic_data)
- [Different label module](paramtemp_different_label)
- [Modality manager](input_data)
- [New preprocessing options](preprocessing_pipeline) 
    - Dimensionality reduction: fastICA, orthogonal NNMF
    - Extract variance components with fastICA
    - sequential kNN for imputation (faster than kNN!)
- [Model significance with permutations in external validation mode](OOCV_analysis)
- [Export your models](paramtemp_export_model)
- [Constrain Cross-validation structure](paramtemp_cv_settings)
- [Subgroups for external validation](OOCV_analysis)
- [Improvements to multiclass module](paramtemp_multigroup)
- resolved bugs and improved usability!


## Release notes

- One-class support vector machine (classification): To correctly use the one-class SVM (within the [LIBSVM package](https://www.csie.ntu.edu.tw/~cjlin/libsvm/)), the reference group needs to be labeled as -1 or 2. One class classification is currently still in development, thus, errors might arise. Please send an email to the developers should you encounter some bugs. 

- Default parameters of matLearn algorithms: Some of the algoirthms from the matLearn package currently come with no default parameters set. Make sure to choose these before initializing and running a model to avoid issues and errors. You can set the parameters when navigating to the **Learning algorithm parameters** ([more information](learning_algorithm_parameters)) option from the **Parameter Template** menu. To get an overview of the parameters and what values they can take, have a look at the [matLearn documentation](https://www.cs.ubc.ca/~schmidtm/Software/matLearn.html).

    - Algorithms that are missing/ have currently wrong default parameters**
        - Local regression 
        - [IMRelief](https://dl.acm.org/doi/abs/10.1016/j.compbiolchem.2019.03.017) needs different default parameters


- Python functions
Some of the learnign algorithms and preprocessing steps call Python functions. In order to use these, please follow the steps on [how to configure Python in Matlab](python_matlab) before. 

- Classification with MCRVM and polynomial kernel
The polynomial kernel currently does not work for the MCRVM algorithm. This is a known issue and we are working on resolving it. 

- Alternative label for multiclass problems is not yet implemented.

